So the last lesson around performance
is going to be on memory.
Another call out that I just wanted to
make before we go too much further is that
I can't remember exactly when I think very
soon there's going to be another course
coming in Frontend Masters.
It's on the workshop schedule for advanced
dev tools stuff that Umar is going to be
running, he does all sorts of good stuff.
So if you are like these are meant to
serve as kind of like your introduction
into like, okay,
I get what the performance tab does and
I know what I'm looking at and
I see paging and stuff like that but
if you're interested in finding
out a lot more on like,
he's going to do I think real life case
studies and like a bunch of really cool
intricate stuff into like memory,
CPU, network, all that stuff.
Stay tuned for
his class because it's coming pretty soon.
So yeah, the basic idea with memory.
So JavaScript as a lot of people know
has garbage collection to it, right?
So you don't need to actually declare and
purge your memory.
But with garbage collected languages, you
can end up with what we call memory leaks,
but they're basically like stuff
that you've forgotten about.
So like, one example would be
if you make too many DOM nodes,
and you don't clean up after them,
so if you're like making a table,
a lot of people use
like virtual scrollers.
And what those will do is they'll
render like 20 frames of the table and
then as you scroll, it'll reuse the top
ones and replace them in the bottom,
things like that so
you don't end up with a huge DOM.
But if you didn't use a virtual scrolling,
you just tried to render like a million
table rows or something like that.
It would take a lot of memory and
you'd start noticing a real
performance hit after a while.
Another thing that can get you is,
this one's a little bit tricky.
But when you think about code, like you're
often interacting between the DOM and
JavaScript, like we've
been doing it a lot today.
So for example, we'll like in JavaScript
will do document.create element LI right?
And so we have a list item but
it's in memory only it hasn't
been attached to the DOM yet.
And then we'll do that LI that we did,
we'll do like body.add child and
we'll pass that and
now LI it's in the DOM.
And so one thing that can happen is that
those references to the in memory ones
that you never did put in the DOM or
you put in you took out if you don't know
those out or delete them somehow those
can just grow and grow in memory as well.
And so the kind of most important
thing that you want to do is like,
establish like, if you have a memory
like that's like the first step right?
Before we go diving too deep into it, so
we really have like three tools for it.
And one of them is a caveat of the course
because it is in Chrome, but it is not
part of the Chrome Dev Tools, but
it is a very cool tool that Chrome offers.
And so
that one is the Chrome Task Manager.
So if you go up to the top right,
then you click on the three dots, and
then you go to more tools Task Manager.
You get this really cool thing that I
didn't know existed for a super long time.
And so this is basically like your
activity manager, but just for
what Chrome's doing.
So it'll show all the tabs
that you have open.
It'll show all the services that
it's running everything like that.
Now, it doesn't work right off the bat
because it just shows its memory
footprint and its CPU.
But what we really wanna know is do
I have a JavaScript memory leak, so
we can right click on the headers here,
and
we can go over to JavaScript memory and
we can add that new column here.
And so now we've got JavaScript memory so
we can see that the right now my front end
masters tab with the chat is
taking up a lot of memory.
And then my Google search
is taking up some memory.
My tab is taking up less memory,
those kind of things.
So one thing that's cool, let me kind
of reorganize stuff a little bit here.
So I'll close these just
to kind of simplify stuff.
And then I'll drag,
let me grab hold of my browser here.
I'll drag this over, and
then I'll kind of set this up.
So what I want to be able to do is kind
of do both at the same time, right,
I want to see my tabs.
And I also want to see the memory usage.
So if we take like this tab here,
it's using two megabytes of
JavaScript memory basically.
And then I made all these buttons
that make a bunch of DOM nodes or
make a bunch of detach nodes or
something like that.
So we see that it's at 2700.
And as I start kind of clicking
on it takes like a second or two,
we can see it spike up
really high right to 6000.
I know that's really small.
I can't find a way to
make the text bigger.
But this is like one
cool thing you can do.
So to be a memory leak,
you would open up the task manager,
enable JavaScript memory, highlight
the tab that you're worried about.
And then do whatever you're worried about.
Are you worried that it has a memory
leak is it just sits there,
are you worried about that has
a memory leak as users interact,
do whatever it is, and kind of keep
track of this because ideally,
all the memory that we allocate,
we should also be purging, right?
So if we're creating DOM,
we should destroy DOM.
If we're creating a big array,
we should get rid of that big array,
those kinds of things.
So you should always be
able to find it that way.
Another way that you should be able to
find it, let me fullscreen this again and
refresh, is actually back on
the Performance tab from the CPU one.
One of the reasons I think that it seems
so confusing is because it's just doing so
much, but when we're on the Performance
tab, we can click on memory here.
So if we do a recording, and let's say we
go back to our page and we do some stuff
and clicking on these buttons that
I know use a memory then I stop it.
We can see down here these
kind of gains in memory and so
memory usage like if it goes up and over
and back down is never a bad thing because
it's there for us to use,
that's totally fine.
What you always want to look for
is this kind of jagged, like sawtooth.
If it's like climbing, that means
it's seeing kind of using something,
it's not purging, and
then it's using more and more.
So you can see this kind of pattern
every time I click the button,
it consumes more memory.
It also gives us kind of a nice breakdown.
So it'll show us what memory is
used by the JavaScript heap,
what of it is documents, what of it
is like DOM nodes being created,
event listeners or GPU memory being used.
So that can kind of start getting
us in the right direction.
We use the task manager
to see if we have a leak,
just watching the JavaScript memory.
And then we can use the performance
profile to see what type of thing is
causing this issue.
And then the third thing we can use is,
of course, the memory panel itself.
So let me dock these back to the bottom.
So we've got three options here for
viewing memory.
One of them is just to
grab a heap snapshot.
So it just grabs everything that's in
memory at the time and shows it to you.
So for example, I could do a snapshot
like this, it takes a second and
it shows this big list of items.
So this list we're going to be looking
at in a couple of different ways, but
the basic idea is that we'll see the type
of item like what it was constructed by
like a UL list item or
just an internal system stuff or an array,
things that should be familiar and then
it'll show these couple of things that
show shallow size,
distance, and retain size.
Distance for the most part we can ignore.
It means distance from the window object,
from the global,
basically like how far deep it is.
But shallow and
retain size are really important.
So the shallow size is like,
how big is that thing?
So if you have an array of a million,
how big is an array of a million?
Retain size is important because
of how garbage collection works.
So garbage collection works via
this mark and sweep process.
I don't know if anybody's ever
heard of mark and sweep before.
Basically it grabs everything that there
is and it gives it like a flag like false.
And then it starts from the window and
it walks every single thing that
the window is pointing towards and
everything it's pointing towards and
everything all the way down the tree.
And everything it touches,
it flips the false to a true.
So it's like I've seen you, I've seen you.
And then at the end of the pass,
anything that still has a false
flag can be deleted, right?
Because nothing's pointing to it.
And so the idea again being if you have an
array of a million and you have a function
called foo, and all food does is it
points at that array of a million.
So it's like array equals another big
array of a million, then array of
a million is the big thing, but since foo
is pointing to the array of a million,
the array of a million will stay as long
as foo has something pointing to it.
So it kind of like it's basically
you can have like an object, and
the object can be pointing to a key
that has an array that's really big.
As long as that object stays in memory, it
has to keep everything the object points
to in memory too, because it doesn't
know when those could be accessed.
And so what can happen, with these DOM
nodes that I talked about earlier,
as you can accidentally still have a
reference to something that you don't care
about anymore.
So like a good thing would be like you
create the LI, you stick it in the DOM,
but you still have that LI.
If you never null it out, it'll just
stay in memory like forever basically.
And so, that's all a long winded way
of saying that you'll get two different
things, one of the shallow size
is the actual size of the thing,
the retained size is how much memory
could be free if that thing were deleted.
And the difference being like you could
have an object with just two keys on it so
very small shallow size, but one of those
keys points to a gigantic array of like
a million so the retain size is very big,
because the only reason that array is
sticking around is because of your object.
Does that make sense,
I'm gonna pause for a second on that.
So that's like basically as long
as something has a pointer,
it stays in memory.
So if you add anything
to the window object,
as long as the window object stays,
which it always will, that thing stays.
And so you can kind of get this
difference in like how big is the thing?
Okay, but how much memory kind of
clear up if I deleted that thing,
meaning that thing and anything that
it's the only pointer to, so yeah,
back onto the memory pad.
So we've got the heap snapshot,
which is great.
Another tool that we have, which is
really useful is allocation over time.
So we can basically see when memory is
being allocated over a period of time,
sort of like the performance or
we're measuring across time.
So like you could demo this pretty
easily by starting a time allocation,
starting record and
then hitting one of my buttons and
will see that every time I hit a button
a whole bunch of memory is allocated.
And we can also see that
it never goes back down.
It's not like a shape like that.
And so if I stop my recording here, I can
see, let me make this a little bigger.
That things are getting bigger.
I can sort by shallow size I can see.
So the system in parentheses
that's like its own stuff.
But I can see that these
arrays are really big and
they're full of these
detached HTMLLIElements.
So if I were to look into the code just so
we can kind of get a picture of what we're
doing that's causing this it shouldn't be
too much of a surprise that we're making
a whole bunch of UILIElements and
we're never knowing them out.
So like we're attaching them but
we're not getting rid of them in memory,
they just stay in memory.
Is that kind of making sense?
So I know it's contrived, like a for loop
of 1000, where you're creating elements or
whatever, but the idea being that you
can kind of start in the memory panel,
see if you have a leak or
how much is being used.
You can also see what's
taking it up over time.
Cool.
So the last thing,
which was probably like
the most common question I got,
last time I did the course.
But Chrome has added a really cool feature
for it is like, people would always ask,
okay, like I see I have a leak.
I know that there's a problem.
How do I figure out what it is,
like what's causing it?
Where's it coming from, because you
have these big complicated apps.
And so chrome added this really cool
thing, this allocation sampling.
And so what this does is it lets
you kind of record again over
time down here, but
what it's going to do is instead of,
just let me go ahead and
stop that, it's coming up.
Let me delete this, let me start one and
then do something that takes up memory.
I think the problem I keep running
into is, if no memory is being used,
then the profiles will be empty.
And this is just a flat page.
So start one, click one of the buttons.
Now this is actually going to tell you
instead of just all there's a bunch of
arrays, or
there's a bunch of ul li elements,
it's going to tell you what
function is causing that problem.
This is like great.
It's like something I've been waiting for
years and years because a lot of times
complicated apps are like, yeah,
I see that I have event listeners.
And there's a bunch of
detached event listeners, but
I don't know what's creating them or
something like that.
So being able to go from memory
allocation to actually pinpointing you in
the sources panel which function is
causing things is like a superpower.
It's really convenient.
So yeah, I think the kind of TLDR
with memory is the first way
to do it is get the task manager
to even see if you have a problem.
Like is it allocating a lot of memory,
and if so, is it going up over time?
If it does having a problem, then I
would go into the Performance tab and
do a performance recording and
then I'll get you a little bit of like a
visual on like what type of problem is it?
Is it like JS heap?
Is it DOM nodes?
Is an event listeners?
That kind of thing.
And then coming in here and actually
taking a look at like, what's allocating?
How much is it eventually going for
the allocations snapshot so
you can see what JavaScript
is causing those things.
It won't always be this clear obviously,
usually you'll have a couple different
things that are big and taking up room.
But this can really help you like
narrow down what's causing stuff and
what's not going away.
One thing I forgot to
mention that you can do too,
is there's a forced garbage
collection button here.
So another thing that would probably
be useful because sometimes
you allocate memory for a long time, but
you do get rid of it eventually
when garbage collection happens.
So for example, if we go back to the heap
snapshot, we can start a recording.
And then we can like generate and
then we can try to garbage collect and
we should see it go back down to zero, but
since it's not, that's like a way we can
be sure that there is a leak,
right that there's not stuff.
We're not using it and
garbage collection doesn't take it away.
That's a problem.
Yeah, so the question is when you're
looking at memory in the Performance tabs,
you're looking at kind of the chart at
the bottom, are you looking to see if
the JavaScript heap goes up and down or
if any of them are not going down?
And it's really if any of them are
jigsawing up, it doesn't matter which one,
then that's some sort of problem
because they should all go back down to
a stable level after any big
allocation should always go back down.
Or at the very least,
it should go up and go flat.
Like, let's say you have an app where you
just rendering like 10,000 things and
that's just what you're doing.
So it should go up and then it should
stay, but it should not keep climbing like
the only reason it would be climbing
is if it was miss properly allocated or
it's just not being garbage collected.